#### Character Advancement

Adventurers grow through experience, success, and story.
Some groups track this with experience points, while others prefer to level characters when major story goals are achieved, after a set number of sessions, or at specific points in the campaign.
Each approach offers a different rhythm of progression.
Choose the one that best fits your game’s pacing and style.

##### Experience Points and Leveling

As adventurers face deadly monsters, solve puzzles, explore new locations, overcome challenges, and navigate complex social situations they earn experience points that represent the knowledge and learning they’ve gained.
All characters involved in an encounter divide the experience earned evenly and apply it to their experience point total.
If the party was assisted by NPCs, count any NPCs as party members when dividing.

When an adventurer accumulates an amount of experience points determined by their character level, they advance a level in their current class or may select a level in a new class.
(See the Multiclassing section in the Character’s Codex, chapter 12).

After winning a combat encounter, the party gains the total experience of all monsters and encounter elements in the encounter (treating encounter elements as monsters of a CR equal to their difficulty increase) divided up by the number of adventurers and NPCs in the party.

##### Objectives

Instead of awarding experience points after each encounter, the Conductor can also award experience for completing objectives (sometimes called _milestones_).
Objectives are divided into major objectives or minor objectives.
When planning an adventure, identify two or three major objectives and four to six minor objectives.
For purposes of experience points, treat major objectives as hard encounters and minor objectives as easy encounters

As an option, the Conductor might ask the party to choose a major objective or a couple of minor objectives unrelated to the adventure at the beginning of each game session.
This gives them some narrative control, rewards them for engaging with the story, and further ties them to the setting.

###### Major Objectives

Major objectives represent the major story beats, pivotal encounters, or significant side quests.

###### Minor Objectives

Minor objectives should represent smaller plot points, optional moments, or ancillary goals.
When using a prepublished adventure, try to map them to goals rather than specific encounters.
This creates flexibility in how the party accomplishes the objectives rather than dictating a specific set of encounters.

##### Leveling Without Experience

Some Conductors eschew standard experience points all together, either because they find tracking it to be tedious or because it better suits a campaign’s narrative structure.

**By Session.**
With session based leveling, consider having the adventurers level after each 4-hour session in tier 1, after two sessions in tier 2, after 3 sessions in tier 3, and after 4 sessions in tier 4.
This system is easy to track but does not always mesh well with story beats.

**Over Time.**
The Conductor may decide that the adventurers level after time passes in-game.
In tier 1, PCs might level at the end of each month.
In tier 2, they might level at the end of each season.
In tier 3, the party might level at the end of each year.
In tier 4, the adventurers might level after 2 or five years.
Be sure to tie the timeframe to the narrative beats of the campaign.

> **Note:**
> See the section [3. Outline Potential Scenes](#3_Outline_Scenes_3_outline_potential_scenes) for more information on the _Tiers of Play_.

**Simplified Experience.**
Encounter points can also be used as an alternative to standard experience points.
Whenever a party fights a battle, each adventurer gains XP equal to the encounter point cost of a battle (for example no matter their level, an easy battle is worth half a point of XP, a medium battle is worth 1 XP, a hard battle is worth 2 XP, and so on.)
For every 15 XP that an adventurer accumulates they gain a level.

**Story-Based.**
With story-based leveling, the adventurers level after significant accomplishments during the campaign.
